Docs: add how to guide for enabling esm-infra-legacy on Trusty (#3093)
canonical/ubuntu-pro-client: docs/howtoguides/trusty_legacy_support.rst

How to enable esm-infra-legacy on Trusty
*****************************************

> The ``esm-infra-legacy`` service can be enabled to grant additional two years of 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``esm-infra-legacy`` service can be enabled to grant an additional two years of 
```

extend security coverage. This service is only available on Trusty, since the release has reached

> its end of life support for esm-infra.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the end of its support period for ``esm-infra``. With ``esm-infra-legacy``, the
support is extended until May 2026.
```

Reviewer: (I assume it's May 2026, but please feel to correct me, or to be more specific if we know the actual date already)

> 

Reviewer: I think it's more important at the top to mention that this is *only* available with paid-for Pro, and where someone has to go to set that up.

Make sure ``ua`` is up-to-date
===============================

> All systems come with ``ua`` pre-installed through the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All Trusty systems come with ``ua`` pre-installed through the
```

``ubuntu-advantage-tools`` package. To make sure that you're running the latest
version of ``ua``, run the following commands:

.. code-block:: bash

>     sudo apt update && sudo apt install ubuntu-advantage-tools
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    sudo apt update && sudo apt install ubuntu-advantage-tools

Note that on Trusty, Ubuntu Pro is referred to by its previous name: "Ubuntu Advantage" (or ``ua``).
```

Check the status of the services
================================

After you have attached to a Pro subscription and
updated the ``ubuntu-advantage-tools`` package, you can check which services
are enabled by running the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo ua status

This will show you which services are enabled or disabled on your machine
(output truncated for brevity):

.. code-block:: text

    SERVICE          ENTITLED  STATUS    DESCRIPTION
    esm-infra        yes       enabled   Expanded Security Maintenance for Infrastructure
    esm-infra-legacy yes       disabled  Expanded Security Maintenance for Infrastructure on Legacy Instances
    livepatch        yes       enabled   Canonical Livepatch service

> If you are entitled to the service, you can enable it by running:

Author: Done, I have just moved the first proposed sentence to a different paragraph. Let me know what you think.

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo ua enable esm-infra-legacy

What to do if esm-infra-legacy is not entitled
===============================================

If status is showing that you are not entitled to the service, you

> will need to buy access to the service. You can contact sales/support for help on that regard.

Reviewer: I would agree with that ordering - we wouldn't want users to get halfway through the article before realising they can't actually use it because they don't have the right subscription - the subscription is a pre-requisite so it should be mentioned at the very top. I also agree with minimising the "here to buy" locations and adding the blog post :+1:

Once you have bought support, you will need to run the following command
on your machine:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo ua refresh

> This command will refresh the contract definitions on your machine. After that, you

Reviewer: I agree, this would flow much better

can confirm that the service is now entitled by running:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo ua status

> If you are now entitled to the service, you can enable it with:

Reviewer: :+1: on this too!

> If you are now entitled to the service, you can enable it with:

Author: I don't think it is worth linking to a different section here, as the other section tells the user more information that is not needed (i.e. run status). Since it is just one simple command, I think the repetition here is fine

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo ua enable esm-infra-legacy

Trusty caveats
===============

There are some known caveats for the Trusty version of `ubuntu-advantage-tools`:

> * **Disabling esm-infra also disables esm-infra-legacy**: Even though this is happening, users

Reviewer 2: This is written probably too much by someone knowing what this means and why it happens.

Disabling esm-infra also disables esm-infra-legacy:
  1. If you disable esm-infra that will due to internal dependencies also disable esm-infra-legacy. Even though further updates will only come in via esm-infra-legacy it is recommended to keep both enabled.
  2. If desired to disable esm-infra-legacy, that is ok and can be done without consequences for esm-infra

Reviewer: Agree with this suggestion

  can disable esm-infra-legacy without consequences for esm-infra
* **do-release-upgrade fails if esm-infra enabled and packages installed from service**: The

>   do-release-upgrade operation will fail here, as there will be an APT dependency chain issue

Reviewer 2: 1. remove "chain"
2. is this already true with esm-infra or only with esm-infra-legacy (the text suggests the former) - If it is the former it might need to go on a page not only talking about trusty-legacy?
3. Is there any workaround, IIRC there is not, but maybe I need to discuss the exact dependency issue that happens (I assume being ahead of the next release?). In any case we should give some helping hand - could be "Gladly that is rarely a real issue as production systems are usually deployed and rarely upgraded in place. The additional years provided by esm-infra and esm-infra-legacy are great to continue with what is known working and thereby extend the time you might need to set up a new production environment on a more recent Ubuntu LTS release."

Reviewer: 1. "packages installed from service" - what service?
2. I agree we need to provide some sort of instructions or guidance on how to work around the issue - at some point we want to encourage users to upgrade away from Trusty, but if do-release-update is going to break them then they're essentially stuck. We don't necessarily have to do that now/as part of this page, but we'll want to put something together to help.

Author: Yes, this is already happening with only `esm-infra`.  And as far as I know, there is no workaround here.
However, I don't know if we should use a separate page for it. What do you think @s-makin ?

Reviewer: I think having the workaround in this page is fine :+1:

  when performing the operation.

> Please note that all of these problems won't happen on Xenial forwards.

Reviewer: :+1: to those suggestions

> The Ubuntu Pro Client is still fully supported on those later releases and
> these issues have already been fixed for them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Ubuntu Pro Client is fully supported from Xenial onwards, where
these issues have already been fixed.
```

Why 14.04 (Trusty) no longer receives new Ubuntu Pro Client features
---------------------------------------------------------------------

> On 14.04 (Trusty), the Ubuntu Pro Client package is not receiving upstream

Reviewer 2: Tell them why?
Before Legacy we thought there won't be a chance as well, we somehow have to admit that.

something like this maybe:
"For a further reduced risk of regressions on 14.04 (Trusty) the Pro client package is almost frozen. Hence it is not receiving regular upstream backports like newer Ubuntu LTS releases do. Beyond version 19.7 there won't be updates except any critical CVE maintenance or features required to deliver features explicitly targeted for Trusty like esm-infra-support in 2024".

updates beyond version 19.7, plus any critical CVE maintenance related to this
version.

> Version 19.7 already has full-featured support of the applicable Ubuntu Pro

Reviewer 2: I think this is too long and not providing anything in addition:

1. remove "already"
2. remove "In the event that a CVE is discovered that affects the Ubuntu Pro Client version on Trusty, a fix and backport will be provided for those specific issues."
WDYT?

Reviewer: I agree, this is basically already stated in the previous paragraph

How to enable esm-infra-legacy on Trusty
*****************************************

> The ``esm-infra-legacy`` service can be enabled to grant an additional two years of 
> extended security coverage. This service is only available on Trusty, since the release has reached

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``esm-infra-legacy`` service can be enabled with the Legacy Support add-on to grant an additional two years of 
extended security coverage. This service is only available on 14.04 LTS (Trusty), since the release has reached
```

> the end of its support period for ``esm-infra``. Check out `Canonical expands Long Term Support to 12 years
> starting with Ubuntu 14.04 LTS <https://canonical.com/blog/canonical-expands-long-term-support-to-12-years-starting-with-ubuntu-14-04-lts>`_
> to read on about what the service provides and for links to contact Canonical to acquire that
> service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the end of its support period for ``esm-infra``. Check out this article to `learn more about the expansion of Long Term Support for Trusty <https://canonical.com/blog/canonical-expands-long-term-support-to-12-years-starting-with-ubuntu-14-04-lts>`_ and how to contact Canonical to purchase this additional support.
```

Make sure ``ua`` is up-to-date
===============================

All Trusty systems come with ``ua`` pre-installed through the
``ubuntu-advantage-tools`` package. To make sure that you're running the latest
version of ``ua``, run the following commands:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo apt update && sudo apt install ubuntu-advantage-tools

Note that on Trusty, Ubuntu Pro is referred to by its previous name: "Ubuntu Advantage" (or ``ua``).

Check the status of the services
================================

After you have attached to a Pro subscription and
updated the ``ubuntu-advantage-tools`` package, you can check which services
are enabled by running the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo ua status

This will show you which services are enabled or disabled on your machine,

> (output truncated for brevity). With the addition of legacy support, it will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(output truncated for brevity). With the addition of Legacy Support, it will
```

now show the esm-infra-legacy service on Trusty:

.. code-block:: text

    SERVICE          ENTITLED  STATUS    DESCRIPTION
    esm-infra        yes       enabled   Expanded Security Maintenance for Infrastructure
    esm-infra-legacy yes       disabled  Expanded Security Maintenance for Infrastructure on Legacy Instances
    livepatch        yes       enabled   Canonical Livepatch service

.. _enable_legacy:

Enabling esm-infra-legacy
==========================

> If you are entitled to the esm-infra-legacy service as shown above, you can enable it by running:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are entitled to the ``esm-infra-legacy`` service as shown above, you can enable it by running:
```

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo ua enable esm-infra-legacy

> What to do if esm-infra-legacy is not entitled
> ===============================================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What if ``esm-infra-legacy`` is not entitled?
===================================================
```

> If status is showing that you are not entitled to the service, you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If ``ua status`` shows that you are not entitled to the service, you
```

> will need to buy access to the service. You can contact sales/support for help on that regard.
> 
> Once you have bought support, you will need to run the following command
> on your machine to refresh the contract definitions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will first need to buy access to the service, as mentioned at the top of this page.

Once you have purchased a support subscription, run the following command
on your machine to refresh the contract definitions:
```

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo ua refresh

After refreshing the contract data, you can confirm that the service is now entitled by running:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo ua status

> Now that you are entitled and can go refer to this :ref:`section <enable_legacy>` to enable
> the service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output should now show that you are entitled to the ``esm-infra-legacy`` service, and you can now enable the service as outlined :ref:`in the enablement section <enable_legacy>`.
```

Trusty caveats
===============

There are some known caveats for the Trusty version of `ubuntu-advantage-tools`:

> * **Disabling esm-infra also disables esm-infra-legacy**: If you disable esm-infra that will due
>   to internal dependencies also disable esm-infra-legacy. Even though further updates will only
>   come in via esm-infra-legacy it is recommended to keep both enable. If desired to disable
>   esm-infra-legacy, that is ok and can be done without consequences for esm-infra.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Disabling ``esm-infra`` also disables ``esm-infra-legacy``
----------------------------------------------------------

If you disable ``esm-infra``, this will (due to internal dependencies) also disable
``esm-infra-legacy``. Although updates will **only** be applied via ``esm-infra-legacy``,
we recommend keeping both services enabled. This is not true in reverse: if you want
to disable ``esm-infra-legacy``, doing so will not disable ``esm-infra``.
```

> * **do-release-upgrade fails if esm-infra enabled and packages installed from it**: The
>   do-release-upgrade operation will fail here, as there will be an APT dependency issue
>   when performing the operation.
> 
>   You can address this issue by running do-release-upgrade with the following command:
> 
>   .. code-block:: bash
> 
>       sudo RELEASE_UPGRADER_ALLOW_THIRD_PARTY=1 do-release-upgrade
>   
>   However, please note you will require to re-enable the Pro services again
>   once you are on Xenial, as Trusty lacks the right mechanisms to re-enable
>   the Pro services automatically after do-release-upgrade.
>   
> It is import to say that these problems won't happen on Xenial or later.
> The Ubuntu Pro Client is fully supported from Xenial onwards, where
> these issues have already been fixed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``do-release-upgrade`` fails if packages are installed from ``esm-infra``
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

If ``esm-infra`` is enabled **and** packages are installed from that source, the
``do-release-upgrade`` operation will fail since there will be an APT dependency issue
when performing the operation.

You can address this issue by running ``do-release-upgrade`` with the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo RELEASE_UPGRADER_ALLOW_THIRD_PARTY=1 do-release-upgrade
  
It is important to note that you will need to re-enable the Ubuntu Pro services again
once you have upgraded to Xenial, since Trusty lacks the correct mechanisms to re-enable
the Pro services automatically after a ``do-release-upgrade``.

Note that this is only the case when upgrading from Trusty to Xenial. The Ubuntu Pro
Client is fully supported from Xenial onwards, where these issues have already been fixed.
```

Why 14.04 (Trusty) no longer receives new Ubuntu Pro Client features
---------------------------------------------------------------------

For a further reduced risk of regressions on 14.04 (Trusty) the Pro client package is almost frozen.
Hence it is not receiving regular upstream backports like newer Ubuntu LTS releases do. Beyond
version 19.7 there won't be updates except any critical CVE maintenance or features explicitly

> targeted for Trusty like esm-infra-support in 2024

Reviewer: ```suggestion
targeted for Trusty like ``esm-infra-support`` in 2024.
```

===================================================

If ``ua status`` shows that you are not entitled to the service, you
will first need to buy access to the service, as mentioned at the top of this page.

Once you have purchased a support subscription, run the following command
on your machine to refresh the contract definitions:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo ua refresh

After refreshing the contract data, you can confirm that the service is now entitled by running:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo ua status

The output should now show that you are entitled to the ``esm-infra-legacy`` service, and you can now enable the service as outlined :ref:`in the enablement section <enable_legacy>`.

Trusty caveats
===============

There are some known caveats for the Trusty version of `ubuntu-advantage-tools`:

Disabling ``esm-infra`` also disables ``esm-infra-legacy``
----------------------------------------------------------

If you disable ``esm-infra``, this will (due to internal dependencies) also disable
``esm-infra-legacy``. Although updates will **only** be applied via ``esm-infra-legacy``,
we recommend keeping both services enabled. This is not true in reverse: if you want

> to disable ``esm-infra-legacy``, doing so will not disable ``esm-infra``.
> ``do-release-upgrade`` fails if packages are installed from ``esm-infra``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to disable ``esm-infra-legacy``, doing so will not disable ``esm-infra``.

``do-release-upgrade`` fails if packages are installed from ``esm-infra``
```

are enabled by running the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo ua status

This will show you which services are enabled or disabled on your machine,
(output truncated for brevity). With the addition of Legacy Support, it will
now show the esm-infra-legacy service on Trusty:

.. code-block:: text

    SERVICE          ENTITLED  STATUS    DESCRIPTION
    esm-infra        yes       enabled   Expanded Security Maintenance for Infrastructure
    esm-infra-legacy yes       disabled  Expanded Security Maintenance for Infrastructure on Legacy Instances
    livepatch        yes       enabled   Canonical Livepatch service

.. _enable_legacy:

Enabling esm-infra-legacy
==========================

If you are entitled to the ``esm-infra-legacy`` service as shown above, you can enable it by running:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo ua enable esm-infra-legacy

What if ``esm-infra-legacy`` is not entitled?
===================================================

If ``ua status`` shows that you are not entitled to the service, you
will first need to buy access to the service, as mentioned at the top of this page.

> Once you have purchased a support subscription, run the following command

Reviewer 3: Suggest "Once you have purchased the Legacy Support add-on, run the following command"

Why? So users and customers are absolutely clear that this is not included in every subscription to Ubuntu Pro.

> Once you have purchased a support subscription, run the following command

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have purchased the Legacy Support add-on, run the following command
```

If you disable ``esm-infra``, this will (due to internal dependencies) also disable
``esm-infra-legacy``. Although updates will **only** be applied via ``esm-infra-legacy``,
we recommend keeping both services enabled. This is not true in reverse: if you want
to disable ``esm-infra-legacy``, doing so will not disable ``esm-infra``.

``do-release-upgrade`` fails if packages are installed from ``esm-infra``
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

If ``esm-infra`` is enabled **and** packages are installed from that source, the
``do-release-upgrade`` operation will fail since there will be an APT dependency issue
when performing the operation.

You can address this issue by running ``do-release-upgrade`` with the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo RELEASE_UPGRADER_ALLOW_THIRD_PARTY=1 do-release-upgrade
  
It is important to note that you will need to re-enable the Ubuntu Pro services again
once you have upgraded to Xenial, since Trusty lacks the correct mechanisms to re-enable
the Pro services automatically after a ``do-release-upgrade``.

Note that this is only the case when upgrading from Trusty to Xenial. The Ubuntu Pro

> Client is fully supported from Xenial onwards, where these issues have already been fixed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Client is fully supported from Xenial onward, where these issues have already been fixed.
```

Why 14.04 (Trusty) no longer receives new Ubuntu Pro Client features
---------------------------------------------------------------------

For a further reduced risk of regressions on 14.04 (Trusty) the Pro client package is almost frozen.

> Hence it is not receiving regular upstream backports like newer Ubuntu LTS releases do. Beyond
> version 19.7 there won't be updates except any critical CVE maintenance or features explicitly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hence it is not receiving regular new features like newer Ubuntu LTS releases do. Beyond
version 19.7 there won't be updates except any critical CVE maintenance or features explicitly
```

> targeted for Trusty like ``esm-infra-support`` in 2024.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
targeted for Trusty (like ``esm-infra-legacy`` in 2024).
```

How to enable esm-infra-legacy on Trusty
*****************************************

The ``esm-infra-legacy`` service can be enabled to grant additional two years of 
extend security coverage. This service is only available on Trusty, since the release has reached
its end of life support for esm-infra.

.. Make sure Pro is up to date
.. include:: ./enable-disable/update-pro.txt

Check the status of the services
================================

> After you have :ref:`attached your subscription <get_token_and_attach>` and

Reviewer 4: for similar reasons as above, I don't think we can link to that article here. It will likely include features that don't exist in trusty (even if it doesn't now, it may in the future)

updated the ``ubuntu-advantage-tools`` package, you can check which services
are enabled by running the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

    ua status

This will show you which services are enabled or disabled on your machine
(output truncated for brevity):

.. code-block:: text

    SERVICE          ENTITLED  STATUS    DESCRIPTION
    esm-infra        yes       enabled   Expanded Security Maintenance for Infrastructure
    esm-infra-legacy yes       disabled  Expanded Security Maintenance for Infrastructure on Legacy Instances
    livepatch        yes       enabled   Canonical Livepatch service

> If you are entitled to the service, you can simply enable it by running:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you are entitled to the service, you can enable it by running:
```

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo ua enable esm-infra-legacy

What to do if esm-infra-legacy is not entitled
===============================================

If status is showing that you are not entitled to the service, you

> will need to buy access to the service through the `Pro webpage`_.

Reviewer 4: Is that the recommended way? Or should we say "contact sales/support"?

Author: Good question, I am assuming we can do this through the portal, but maybe it is safer to say for the user to look for support

Once you have bought the support, you will need to run the following command
on your machine:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo ua refresh

This command will refresh the contract definitions on your machine. After that, you
can confirm that the service is now entitled by running:

.. code-block:: bash

>     ua status

Reviewer 4: We shuold probably recommend `sudo` for `status` here since I'm not sure if trusty non-root status works

Author: Good point

If you are now entitled to the service, you can enable it with:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo ua enable esm-infra-legacy

Trusty caveats
=========================================

> There are some well known caveats for the Trusty version of `ubuntu-advantage-tools`:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There are some known caveats for the Trusty version of `ubuntu-advantage-tools`:
```

* **Disabling esm-infra also disables esm-infra-legacy**: Even though this is happening, users
  can disable esm-infra-legacy without consequences for esm-infra
* **do-release-upgrade fails if esm-infra enabled and packages installed from service**: The
  do-release-upgrade operation will fail here, as there will be an APT dependency chain issue
  when performing the operation.

> Please note that all of these problems won't happen on Xenial forwards. The client is still fully

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Please note that all of these problems won't happen on Xenial forwards. The Ubuntu Pro Client is still fully
```

supported on those later releases and these issues have already been fixed for them.

Why 14.04 (Trusty) is no longer supported

> =========================================

Reviewer 4: I think this can become a subheading under "trusty caveats" - I think that means the underline changes but not sure
